# Introduction to Observability

1. **Monitoring:** It is a process of gathering data to understand what's going on inside of your infrastructure
   
2. **Observability:** Observability is the ability to understand what is happening inside a system, like an application or network,
   by collecting and analyzing data such as logs, metrics, and traces. 3 different pillers of observability - Metrics, Logs, Traces

3. **Metric:**
   
   a. Metrics are numerical values that can track a specific aspect of a system's performance or behavior. Example: in  a web application, metrics could include things like: 
      Response time, CPU and memory usage, Request rate etc.
   
   b. Why do we collect metrics:
   
     * First benefit is that it creates a baseline for operations inside of our environment. Metrics can tell us what normal looks like for our applications. (If application is normal or abnormal)

     * Without metrics, we don't have a way to tell if our application is online.

     * If we start to track metrics, we can start to respond to problems before they happen.

4. **Log:**

    a. A log is a computer generated file that contains usage information of a system.

    b. A log is a record of events, actions, or messages generated by software, applications, servers, or devices. Logs capture detailed information about
       what is happening within a system at a specific point in time.

    c. Logs typically contain: Timestamp, message, context, severity level (info, warn, error, debug etc)

    d. Why do we collect logs:

     * Compilance: Standards that the business is held to might dictate which logs you'll need to store and for how long you need to store them.
     
     * Insight: Logs provide a unique view into exactly what's going on in the application and system performance.
     
     * Security: Logs are needed to demonstrate that only authorized activies are going on inside of a system.

5. **Trace:**

    a. Traces are records that track the path and timing of a request as it moves through different components or services of a distributed system.
       They provide a detailed, end-to-end view of the execution flow, showing how individual parts of a system interact to fulfill a request.

    b. A trace is made up of spans, which represent individual operations within a request. Each span typically includes: Start and end times, service names, operation name, Parent and child relationships etc.

    c. Why do we collect traces:

     * Microservice environment: Traces allow us to easily track and monitor what's going on with all of these different services.
  
     * Optimization: Tracing allows us to optimize the performance of the application by identifying bottlenecks in the calls being made.
  
     * Troubleshooting: When something goes wrong, we need insight into actual application code. This can assist us in tracking down errors with the code.
